# Introduction to HTML
# 3. Forms
### 3.1. Forms

#### 3.1.1. Introduction to HTML Forms

Forms are a part of everyday life. When we use a physical form in real life, we write down information and give it to someone to process. Think of the times you’ve had to fill out information for various applications like a job, or a bank account, or dropped off a completed suggestion card — each instance is a form!

Just like a physical form, an HTML `<form>` element is responsible for collecting information to send somewhere else. Every time we browse the internet we come into contact with many forms and we might not even realize it. There’s a good chance that if you’re typing into a text field or providing an input, the field that you’re typing into is part of a `<form>`!

In this lesson, we’ll go over the structure and syntax of a `<form>` and the many elements that populate it.


#### 3.1.2. How a Form Works
We can think of the internet as a network of computers which send and receive information. Computers need an HTTP request to know how to communicate. The HTTP request instructs the receiving computer how to handle the incoming information. More information can be found in our article about HTTP requests.

The `<form>` element is a great tool for collecting information, but then we need to send that information somewhere else for processing. We need to supply the` <form>` element with both the location of where the `<form>`‘s information goes and what HTTP request to make. Take a look at the sample `<form>` below:

```html
<form action="./example.html" method="POST">
</form>
```
In the above example, we’ve created the skeleton for a `<form>` that will send information to **example.html** as a POST request — the `action` attribute determines where the information is sent and the `method` attribute is assigned a HTTP verb that is included in the HTTP request. (Note: HTTP verbs like POST do not need to be capitalized for the request to work, but it’s done so out of convention. In the example above we could have written `method="post"` and it would still work)

The `<form>` element can also contain child elements. For instance, it would be helpful to provide a header so that users know what this `<form>` is about. We could also add a paragraph to provide even more detail. Let’s see an example of this in code:

```html
<form action="/example.html" method="POST">
  <h1>Creating a form</h1>
  <p>Looks like you want to learn how to create an HTML form. Well, the best way to learn is to play around with it.</p>
</form>
```

The example above doesn’t collect any user input, but we’ll do that in the next exercise. For now, let’s practice making the foundation of an HTML `<form>`!


#### 3.1.3. Text Input
If we want to create an input field in our `<form>`, we’ll need the help of the `<input>` element.

The `<input>` element has a `type` attribute which determines how it renders on the web page and what kind of data it can accept.

The first value for the `type` attribute we’re going to explore is `"text"`. When we create an `<input>` element with `type="text`", it renders a text field that users can type into. It’s also important that we include a `name` attribute for the `<input>` — without the name attribute, information in the `<input>` won’t be sent when the `<form>` is submitted. We’ll explain more about submissions and the submit button in a later exercise. For now, let’s examine the following code that produces a text input field:

```html
<form action="/example.html" method="POST">
  <input type="text" name="first-text-field">
</form>
```

After users type into the `<input>` element, the value of the `value` attribute becomes what is typed into the text field. The value of the `value` attribute is paired with the value of the `name` attribute and sent as text when the form is submitted. For instance, if a user typed in “important details” in the text field created by our `<input>` element:

When the form is submitted, the text: `"first-text-field=important details"` is sent to `/example.html` because the value of the `name` attribute is `"first-text-field"` and the value of `value` is `"important details"`.

We could also assign a default value for the `value` attribute so that users have a pre-filled text field when they first see the rendered form like so:

```html
<form action="/example.html" method="POST">
  <input type="text" name="first-text-field" value="already pre-filled">
</form>
```


#### 3.1.4. Adding a Label
In the previous exercise we created an `<input>` element but we didn’t include anything to explain what the `<input>` is used for. For a user to properly identify an `<input>` we use the appropriately named `<label>` element.

The `<label>` element has an opening and closing tag and displays text that is written between the opening and closing tags. To associate a `<label>` and an `<input>`, the `<input>` needs an `id` attribute. We then assign the `for` attribute of the `<label>` element with the value of the `id` attribute of `<input>`, like so:

```html
<form action="/example.html" method="POST">
  <label for="meal">What do you want to eat?</label>
  <br>
  <input type="text" name="food" id="meal">
</form>
```

#### 3.1.5. Password Input
Think about all those times we have to put sensitive information, like a password or PIN, into a `<form>`. We wouldn’t want our information to be seen by anyone peeking over our shoulder! Luckily, we have the `type="password"` attribute for `<input>`!

An `<input type ="password">` element will replace input text with another character like an asterisk (`*`) or a dot (`•`). The code below provides an example of how to create a password field:

```html
<form>
  <label for="user-password">Password: </label>
  <input type="password" id="user-password" name="user-password">
</form>
```


#### 3.1.6. Number Input
We’ve now gone over two `type` attributes for` <input>` related to text. But, we might want our users to type in a number — in which case we can set the `type` attribute to… (you guessed it)… `"number"`!

By setting `type="number"` for an `<input>` we can restrict what users type into the input field to just numbers (and a few special characters like `-`, `+`, and `.`). We can also provide a `step` attribute which creates arrows inside the input field to increase or decrease by the value of the `step` attribute. Below is the code needed to render an input field for numbers:

```html
<form>
  <label for="years">Years of experience</label>
  <input id="years" name="years" type="number" step="1">
</form>
```


#### 3.1.7. Range Input
Using an `<input type="number">` is great if we want to allow users to type in any number of their choosing. But, if we wanted to limit what numbers our users could type we might consider using a different type value. Another option we could use is setting `type` to `"range"` which creates a slider.

To set the minimum and maximum values of the slider we assign values to the `min` and `max` attribute of the `<input>`. We could also control how smooth and fluid the slider works by assigning the `step` attribute a value. Smaller `step` values will make the slider more fluidly, whereas larger `step` values will make the slider move more noticeably. Take a look at the code to create a slider:

```html
<form>
  <label for="volume">Volume Control</label>
  <input id="volume" name="volume" type="range" min="0" max="100" step="1">
</form>
```

The code above renders: rendered slider for volume control

#### 3.1.8. Checkbox Input
So far the types of inputs we’ve allowed were all single choices. But, what if we presented multiple options to users and allow them to select any number of options? Sounds like we could use checkboxes! In a `<form>` we would use the `<input>` element and set `type="checkbox"`. Examine the code used to create multiple checkboxes:

```html
<form>
  <p>Choose your pizza toppings:</p>
  <label for="cheese">Extra cheese</label>
  <input id="cheese" name="topping" type="checkbox" value="cheese">
  <br>
  <label for="pepperoni">Pepperoni</label>
  <input id="pepperoni" name="topping" type="checkbox" value="pepperoni">
  <br>
  <label for="anchovy">Anchovy</label>
  <input id="anchovy" name="topping" type="checkbox" value="anchovy">
</form>
```


#### 3.1.9. Radio Button Input
Checkboxes work well if we want to present users with multiple options and let them choose one or more of the options. However, there are cases where we want to present multiple options and only allow for one selection — like asking users if they agree or disagree with the terms and conditions. Let’s look over the code used to create radio buttons:

```html
<form>
  <p>What is sum of 1 + 1?</p>
  <input type="radio" id="two" name="answer" value="2">
  <label for="two">2</label>
  <br>
  <input type="radio" id="eleven" name="answer" value="11">
  <label for="eleven">11</label>
</form>
```


#### 3.1.10. Dropdown list

Radio buttons are great if we want our users to pick one option out of a few visible options, but imagine if we have a whole list of options! This situation could quickly lead to a lot of radio buttons to keep track of.

An alternative solution is to use a dropdown list to allow our users to choose one option from an organized list. Here’s the code to create a dropdown menu:

```html
<form>
  <label for="lunch">What's for lunch?</label>
  <select id="lunch" name="lunch">
    <option value="pizza">Pizza</option>
    <option value="curry">Curry</option>
    <option value="salad">Salad</option>
    <option value="ramen">Ramen</option>
    <option value="tacos">Tacos</option>
  </select>
</form>
```


#### 3.1.11. Datalist Input
Even if we have an organized dropdown list, if the list has a lot of options, it could be tedious for users to scroll through the entire list to locate one option. That’s where using the `<datalist>` element comes in handy.

The `<datalist>` is used with an `<input type="text">` element. The `<input>` creates a text field that users can type into and filter options from the `<datalist>`. Let’s go over a concrete example:

```html
<form>
  <label for="city">Ideal city to visit?</label>
  <input type="text" list="cities" id="city" name="city">

  <datalist id="cities">
    <option value="New York City"></option>
    <option value="Tokyo"></option>
    <option value="Barcelona"></option>
    <option value="Mexico City"></option>
    <option value="Melbourne"></option>
    <option value="Other"></option>  
  </datalist>
</form>
```


#### 3.1.12. Textarea element
An `<input>` element with `type="text"` creates a single row input field for users to type in information. However, there are cases where users need to write in more information, like a blog post. In such cases, instead of using an `<input>`, we could use `<textarea>`.

The `<textarea>` element is used to create a bigger text field for users to write more text. We can add the attributes `rows` and `cols` to determine the amount of rows and columns for the `<textarea>`. Take a look:

```html
<form>
  <label for="blog">New Blog Post: </label>
  <br>
  <textarea id="blog" name="blog" rows="5" cols="30"></textarea>
</form>
```


#### 3.1.13. Submit Form
Remember, the purpose of a form is to collect information that will be submitted. That’s the role of the submit button — users click on it when they are finished with filling out information in the `<form>` and they’re ready to send it off. Now that we’ve gone over how to create various input elements, let’s now go over how to create a submit button!

To make a submit button in a `<form>`, we’re going to use the reliable `<input>` element and set the `type` to `"submit"`. For instance:

```html
<form>
  <input type="submit" value="Send">
</form>
```


#### 3.1.14. Forms Review
Nice work interacting with the extremely common and useful `<form>` element!

In this lesson we went over:

* The purpose of a `<form>` is to allow users to input information and send it.
* The `<form>`‘s `action` attribute determines where the form’s information goes.
* The `<form>`‘s `method` attribute determines how the information is sent and processed.
* To add fields for users to input information we use the` <input>` element and set the `type` attribute to a field of our choosing:
  * Setting `type` to `"text"` creates a single row field for text input.
  * Setting `type` to `"password"` creates a single row field that censors text input.
  * Setting `type` to `"number"` creates a single row field for number input.
  * Setting `type` to `"range"` creates a slider to select from a range of numbers.
  * Setting `type` to `"checkbox"` creates a single checkbox which can be paired with other checkboxes.
  * Setting `type` to `"radio"` creates a radio button that can be paired with other radio buttons.
  * Setting `type` to `"list"` will pair the `<input>` with a `<datalist>` element.
  * Setting `type` to `"submit"` creates a submit button.
* A `<select>` element is populated with `<option>` elements and renders a dropdown list selection.
* A `<datalist>` element is populated with `<option>` elements and works with an `<input>` to search through choices.
* A `<textarea>` element is a text input field that has a customizable area.
* When a `<form>` is submitted, the `name` of the fields that accept input and the `value` of those fields are sent as `name=value` pairs.

Using the `<form>` element in conjunction with the other elements listed above allows us to create sites that take in consideration the wants and needs of our users. Take the opportunity to take what you’ve learned and apply it!



##### Instructions
If you want to challenge yourself:

* Create a form with multiple fields that accept user input.
* Add two separate sets of radio buttons or checkboxes.
* Search how to add *placeholder* (hint hint) to an input field. A placeholder shows ups when the field has no `value`, it disappears after the user types or selects something in the field.



